# Syn-Aesthetics

In the rush to become  the brand name for artificial intelligence, many unforeseen risks beyond misinformation and bad actors underly the ability of current models to become truly ubiquitous and beneficial to our society. among the most pervasive elements  of AI generated images and film is the so-called 'uncanny valley' effect, or bukimi no tani, most noticeable in visual media, but also well-documented within the field of humanoid robotics, and in social interactions between able-bodied and physically disfigured and disabled individuals. It may even contribute to the emotional volatility and animosity associated with self-driving cars.
One potential underlying cause that's been suggested for the uncanny valley effect is that a mismatch in stimuli and response occurs in the parietal regions of the brain, the location of our mirror neurons,  leading to a physical reaction within the sympathetic nervous system, raising cortisol and adrenaline levels in a classic, fight, flight, freeze response. This explanation suggests that there are parallels with other involuntary responses to external physical stimuli such as cognitive dissonance, and misophonia, where repetitive sounds or movement can trigger spontaneous anger and rage. There are also threads that connect to conditions like anaphylaxis or Irukandji syndrome, where the an acute allergic reaction or poisoning causes feelings of impending doom before any physical effects present themselves, strobe-induced epileptic seizures, and even arc flash, where welders experience a microsecond of high intensity light before their visor darkens, leading to episodes of intense negative emotion. These examples encompass similar processes where, like a black box, output can't be easily determined from input, but is nonetheless very convincing.
While there has been research and insight devoted to the effects of the uncanny valley in film, animation- 3d modeling in particular-and more recently as AI image generators have become integrated into social media, art, and design, but there has been less focus on how these reactions relate to other types of media using AI algorithms to approximate human observation and interaction. As someone who experiences profound unease when interacting with and internalizing AI created visual media, the question arose about the potential of an inherent stress-inducing quality that is present with LLM-driven writing, speech, music, and chat models, and possibly even self-driving cars. Could regularly interacting with a generative pre-trained model instill a measurable sense of disquietude?
This idea came about while working with the ChillsDB, a collection of data focused on chills-inducing stimuli in media with subsets related to music, film, speech, and reddit threads. It is a fascinating collection recording the phenomena of goosebumps being induced by various sources, with intensity, frequency, and other metrics documented rigorously across a sample size of over 10,000 responses. The original intention was to comb through the database to find commonalities between different mediums to see if there were any 'syn-aesthetic' relationships at work, such as: could "frisson" in music correlate to being moved by an inspiring speech, or a thread that resonates across age, gender, and social strata?
 Upon digging deeper into the initial exploratory analysis, patterns within each of the individual datasets emerged that were even more compelling than the comparisons between them. The metrics associated with pleasure difference and positive versus negative effect of the chills-inducing stimuli were factors that hadn't anticipated beforehand, but it was obvious that they played a crucial role in the story of how and why we subliminally respond in both a sublime and spine-tingling fashion to certain elements that register beyond merely observing the action. 
By performing some routine sentiment analysis, I was able to validate this assumption to establish a working baseline between "good" and "bad" chills, and this was the point that it dawned on me that these preliminary functions could be relevant to current questions surrounding general artificial intelligence. There was even the possibility that they could be applied to self-reported studies of the physical effects of interactions with AI augmented products like Stable Diffusion or Gemini to determine the way people registered the effects of the uncanny valley with regard to these emerging technologies.
 Along with the many other potential dangers presented by a tool too powerful for humans to control, there are other less obvious reasons that could prevent the benefits of AI from outweighing the risks. Every technology faces the challenge of being relevant, and of being replaced by something more relevant. A fundamental issue that could undermine the ability of our current models to be incorporated as functional tools lies in the barrier of overcoming aversion created by the uncanny valley. This study presents that by being able to determine the physical effects of the media we consume, we can begin to engineer models that are more compatible with human psychology and proprioception by virtue of being more palatable to measurable metrics of aesthetics.
